and joining me now is dr. Tom Ingoldsby
he's the director at the Center for
Health security of the Johns Hopkins
Bloomberg School of Public Health dr.
Inglesby welcome to Meet the Press and
let me just start with a simple question
33 states are doing this we had we noted
that 18 states have hit their one-day
case total high of those 33 in the last
two weeks so technically not meeting
those phase 1 metrics are we ready to be
doing this as a country I think we need
to be going forward very cautiously I
think if you look at the overall country
numbers were about 200,000 new cases a
week at this point and in the last month
we've had something on the order of
60,000 deaths so most of the illness and
death has occurred over the last 30 days
so overall as a country we still have a
long way to go but the states are in
very different places and some states a
small minority of states are beginning
to to get closer to the white house
metrics of two weeks decline and so in
those places if they have other
capabilities in place if they're able to
really rapidly isolate and trace the
contacts of patients with kovat if
they're able to diagnose very widely
everybody who's got symptoms of kovat
not just the sick people but everybody
then those states would be the places
where would be least risky to go ahead
and begin to reopen are we or do we not
have the testing capacity right now to
give the states the met the the security
they have of making these decisions how
much is this somewhat guesswork because
of our test our lack of surveillance
capabilities when it comes to where the
virus is in many of these places yeah I
think there still is a lot of
uncertainty you but there is a range of
diagnostic testing capability across the
country and and you can tell that in the
percent of persons who are who are
positive in some states they're testing
so so many people that the percent of
people who are positive is very low and
that's a good number
in other places
people testing is very high and that's
it that's that's worrisome so it depends
on where you are in the country in terms
of access to testing the operations
around testing it's like a patchwork
across the country is there a way when
were you gonna know whether this is a
mistake or not is it basically waiting
the next two to four weeks and these
incubation periods yeah for this disease
it's going to take about two weeks two
to three weeks for us to begin to see
trends that come out of the changes in
social distancing so measure taken this
morning you probably won't see a change
in hospitalization rates where ICU
capacity until two or three weeks from
now so that's the nature of the disease
it's going to take a little time for
things to get into the system what is
something that these state health
officials don't have access to data wise
that you wish they did before making
these decisions I think we should and in
a in the coming weeks and months we need
to get a much better handle on the
number of mild and moderate cases of
disease that we have the good news is
that many many people do not get
seriously ill with this disease but the
bad news is that we're not capturing
those people in terms of numbers for the
country and if we don't know who they
are then we can't break their chains of
transmission we can't isolate them we
can't quarantine their contacts so we
need to know much more about the mild
and moderate illnesses around the
country and that will come with more
diagnostic testing I want to ask you
something that somebody wrote about the
CDC it was I think a colleague of yours
at Johns Hopkins oh no excuse me doctor
jaha sat at Harvard but it was sort of
the odd lacking of missing data that the
CDC normally tracks he said normally you
know if you wanted to find out how many
people had tuberculosis in this country
in the last year asked the CDC want to
know about health care-associated
infections ask the CDC but ask how many
Cova 19 tests have been done and the CDC
doesn't have an answer want a daily
update and how many people are getting
hospitalized eyes for Koba 19 the CDC
isn't tracking it
want to know if social distancing is
making a difference the CDC doesn't know
what is going on here are we missing a
huge component of our public health
response I think we do need more data
clearly I certainly agree with the the
need for the data that dr. Jia outlined
there I think that we're tracking this
epidemic in a different way than we've
tracked others we haven't had this
urgent need to understand
hospitalizations on a day-to-day
week-to-week basis as we've had for some
of the other things we've confronted
before and we need to get better as a
country we need to we need to get our
like if you look at State Health
Department data right now some states
are not reporting their hospitalization
data we live in a federal system if
they're not reporting at the state level
it's hard for CDC to get that data in
real time so I think we all need to
collectively get better some states have
more data available than others but we
should all be rising let's get a
realistic timeline next three months
next six months a lot of people are
concerned about the fall how concerned
are you and is is there any way of Nut
of avoiding a bad fall outcome at this
point without either advancements in a
treatment or a vaccine well before we
even get to the fall I am worried that
we will have small waves in various
places around the country for the coming
months hopefully we won't but as we
begin to ease social distancing in
various places in the country this virus
is highly transmissible that nothing has
changed in the underlying dynamics of
this virus if we stop social distancing
altogether tomorrow we would recreate
the conditions that existed in the
country in february/march so what we
need to do is continue to our best
possible effort all the individual
efforts we're making around social
distancing staying six feet apart
wearing masks went in public avoiding
large gatherings but the extent to which
we're able to do that over the next
couple of months will dictate how we do
as States and as a country ultimately in
the fall we have an additional challenge
we have influenza that will reappear the
flu season will start and at that point
kovin will be mixed with flu
and we'll both be contributing to
hospitalizations and ICU beds and so
we're gonna have two concurrent large
public health challenges at the same
time so I am worried about the uptake
and hospitalization rate and the more
people needing intensive care in the
fall but I'm still I am I don't think
people should think that there will be a
lull that just because the summers
coming we're gonna have a lull before
the fall
we'd be wonderful if that happens but I
don't think we should at all assume that
at this point given the nature of this
virus and I'm gonna leave it there
because I think that's a single most
important takeaway viewers need to have
don't call it a law it is unlikely we're
gonna have a lull in the summer anyway
dr. Inglesby from Johns Hopkins
University thanks for starting us off
with your expertise on this much
appreciate it thanks for having me
checking and joining me now are two
state officials sent hello from
Washington I'm Chuck Todd and thanks for
checking out the Meet the Press channel
on YouTube click on the button down here
to subscribe and click over here to
watch the latest interviews highlights
and other digital exclusives